Arts - Iraq Reclaims 17,000 Looted Artifacts, Its Biggest-Ever Repatriation. 
The cuneiform tablets and other objects had been held by the Museum of the Bible, founded by the family that owns the Hobby Lobby craft store chain, and by Cornell University. When the Iraqi prime minister’s plane touched down in Baghdad last week after an official visit to the United States, its cargo included 17000 archaeological artifacts returned by a prominent museum and an Ivy League university in the largest-ever repatriation of looted Iraqi antiquities. On Tuesday, plywood crates holding the thousands of clay tablets and seals pieces from Mesopotamia, site of the world’s earliest civilizations were stacked next to a table displaying a few of the artifacts as the Iraqi Culture Ministry took custody of the cultural treasures. The repatriation of so many objects rounds out a remarkable chapter in the story of a country so ravaged by decades of conflict and war that its very history was pulled out of the ground by antiquities thieves and sold abroad, ending up on display in museums of other countries. It is a victory in a global effort by countries to press Western institutions to return culturally vital artifacts, like the push to repatriate the famed Benin Bronzes to Nigeria.
“This is not just about thousands of tablets coming back to Iraq again it is about the Iraqi people and their identity ” said Hassan Nadhem, the Iraqi minister of culture, tourism and antiquities. The institution that held about 12 000 of the items was the Museum of the Bible, a four-year-old Washington museum founded and funded by the Christian evangelical family that owns the Hobby Lobby craft store chain. The addition of artifacts from ancient Mesopotamia was intended to provide context for Old Testament events. Southern Iraq, part of ancient Mesopotamia, contains thousands of unexcavated archaeological sites between the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers where the world’s first known civilizations began. Babylon and Ur, the reputed birthplace of the Prophet Abraham, flourished there, and it is where writing, astronomy and the first known code of law originated.
Four years ago, the U.S. Department of Justice fined Hobby Lobby $3 million for failing to exercise due diligence in its acquisitions of more than 5,000 artifacts. Some were among those returned last week to Iraq.  More than 5,000 of the other pieces returned last week had been held by Cornell University. A collection from a previously unknown Sumerian city of Garsana was donated to the university in 2000 by an American collector. Partly because the city was unknown, it was widely suspected by archaeologists to have come from a looted archaeological site in the south of Iraq. This is because when the government forces lost control of parts of southern Iraq in 1991, in the aftermath of the first Gulf War, widespread looting occurred at unexcavated sites. Meanwhile the industrial-scale thefts continued amid a security vacuum after the 2003 U.S.-led invasion.
Hobby Lobby’s batch of repatriated objects does not include what had been the best-known of its holdings from Mesopotamia. A clay tablet fragment roughly 3,500 years old inscribed with a fragment of the Gilgamesh epic.  The tablet was first offered for sale by a Jordanian antiquities dealer in London in 2001. It then changed hands several times, and in 2014 Christie’s auction house brokered a private sale of it to Hobby Lobby with documents later found to be false. Hobby Lobby, which is suing Christie’s auction house to recover the $1.6 million that it paid for the fragment in a private sale in London, withdrew its objections to returning it in July. Now in a federal warehouse in Brooklyn, the piece is expected to be handed back to Iraq in a few weeks. Because most of the objects bought for the museum were not studied, they remain a mystery. 
Many archaeologists criticize any research into potentially looted items, saying it not only deprives the countries of origin of the opportunity to study the objects themselves, but also helps fuel the trade in looted antiquities by raising black-market prices for similar items.
Cornell, which has revealed little about the return of its collection, said that it had repatriated 5,381 clay tablets to Iraq. 
The Museum of the Bible counted more than 8,000 others when it began reviewing the provenance of every item in its collection. The museum’s highest-profile acquisitions purported fragments of the Dead Sea Scrolls turned out to be forgeries. When it became clear shortly after the museum opened that it could not verify the provenance of the Mesopotamia artifacts, it packed them up to be returned.

Mesopotamia is the ?
Site of earliest civilizations
Site of the earliest museum 
Site of earliest middle east institutions 

